\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
@c %**start of header
@set VERSION 0.11.0
@set UPDATED 2026-06-24
@setfilename wiremix.info
@settitle wiremix @value{VERSION}
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual documents wiremix, a dual-mode (TUI + agent-native CLI) mixer for
PipeWire, version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Mohamed Hammad & Spacecraft Software.

wiremix is a fork of the upstream wiremix by Thomas Sowell
(@url{https://github.com/tsowell/wiremix}); see the @file{CREDITS.md} file.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License
(@url{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/}).
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Sound
@direntry
* wiremix: (wiremix).           Dual-mode TUI + CLI mixer for PipeWire.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title wiremix
@subtitle A dual-mode (TUI + agent-native CLI) mixer for PipeWire
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@author Mohamed Hammad
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top wiremix

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What wiremix is.
* Invocation::                  Running wiremix and choosing a mode.
* Interactive TUI::             The terminal user interface.
* Command-Line Interface::      Noun-verb commands for scripts and agents.
* Global Flags::                Flags accepted by every command.
* JSON Output and Exit Codes::  The machine-readable contract.
* Configuration::               The @file{wiremix.toml} configuration file.
* Reporting Bugs::              Maintainer and contact.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

wiremix lets you adjust volumes, route audio between devices and applications,
and configure audio device settings such as input/output ports and profiles on
a @uref{https://pipewire.org/, PipeWire} system.

It is @dfn{dual-mode}: an interactive terminal user interface (TUI) for humans,
and a machine-readable, agent-native command-line interface (CLI) for scripts
and AI agents. Running @command{wiremix} with no subcommand starts the TUI;
running a subcommand such as @samp{wiremix node list --json} performs a
one-shot command and exits.

The TUI is modeled on @command{ncpamixer}, which was itself inspired by
@command{pavucontrol}.

@node Invocation
@chapter Invocation

@example
wiremix [GLOBAL-FLAGS] [SUBCOMMAND ...]
@end example

@subheading Choosing a mode

With no subcommand, wiremix runs the interactive TUI (@pxref{Interactive TUI}).
With a subcommand, it runs that one-shot command and exits
(@pxref{Command-Line Interface}).

@subheading Output-mode detection

For subcommands, the output rendering is resolved by this cascade (first match
wins):

@enumerate
@item An explicit @option{--json} or @option{--format} flag.
@item An agent environment: @env{AI_AGENT}, @env{AGENT}, or @env{CI} set
(forces JSON, no color, non-interactive).
@item @code{stdout} is a terminal: human-readable output.
@item @code{stdout} is piped or redirected: JSON.
@end enumerate

@option{--format explore} selects the TUI explicitly. When an agent environment
is detected and no subcommand is given, wiremix does @emph{not} start the TUI;
it prints a pointer to @samp{wiremix --help} and exits.

@subheading TUI options

These options configure the TUI and are also honored when running it:
@option{-c}/@option{--config}, @option{-r}/@option{--remote},
@option{-f}/@option{--fps}, @option{-s}/@option{--char-set},
@option{-t}/@option{--theme}, @option{-p}/@option{--peaks},
@option{--mouse}/@option{--no-mouse}, @option{-v}/@option{--tab},
@option{-T}/@option{--tabs}, @option{-m}/@option{--max-volume-percent},
@option{--enforce-max-volume}, and @option{--lazy-capture}. Run
@samp{wiremix --help} for the full list, or see @ref{Configuration} for the
equivalent file settings.

@node Interactive TUI
@chapter Interactive TUI

Run @command{wiremix} with no arguments to open the mixer. Tabs across the top
select Playback, Recording, Output Devices, Input Devices, and Configuration.

Everything except quitting can also be done with the mouse: click the numeric
volume percentage to toggle muting, scroll lists with the wheel, and
right-click to set the default source/sink.

@subheading Default key bindings

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Input @tab Action
@item q @tab Quit
@item m @tab Toggle mute
@item d @tab Set default source/sink
@item l / Right @tab Increment volume
@item h / Left @tab Decrement volume
@item Enter / c @tab Open dropdown or choose
@item Esc @tab Cancel dropdown
@item j / Down @tab Move down
@item k / Up @tab Move up
@item H / Shift+Tab @tab Select previous tab
@item L / Tab @tab Select next tab
@item ` @tab Set volume 0%
@item 1 @dots{} 9 @tab Set volume 10% @dots{} 90%
@item 0 @tab Set volume 100%
@item ? @tab Toggle help screen
@end multitable

Key bindings are fully configurable (@pxref{Configuration}).

@node Command-Line Interface
@chapter Command-Line Interface

The CLI follows a @code{noun verb} structure. Every data-returning command
supports @option{--json} (@pxref{JSON Output and Exit Codes}); every write
command supports @option{--dry-run}. Object ids come from the corresponding
@code{list} command and are @emph{not} stable across PipeWire restarts; the
@code{serial} and @code{name} fields let you re-resolve a target.

@subheading nodes

Nodes are streams and device endpoints --- anything with a volume you can set.

@table @samp
@item node list
List controllable nodes (with @code{kind}, volumes, mute, default flags).
@item node get @var{id}
Show one node.
@item node set-volume @var{id} @var{percent}
Set a node's volume, as a percentage applied to all channels (100 = unity).
@item node mute @var{id} [--on | --off | --toggle]
Mute, unmute, or toggle a node. The default is to toggle.
@item node set-default @var{id}
Set a sink node as the default sink, or a source node as the default source.
@end table

@subheading devices

@table @samp
@item device list
List devices with their profiles.
@item device get @var{id}
Show one device: the active profile and all available profiles.
@item device set-profile @var{id} @var{index}
Switch a device to the profile with the given index (see @samp{device get}).
@end table

@subheading other

@table @samp
@item link list
List links (connections) between nodes.
@item metadata list
List metadata objects and their properties.
@item metadata get [--name @var{name}]
Show one metadata object; @var{name} defaults to @samp{default}.
@item server info
Show the default sink/source, object counts, and the connected remote.
@item schema
Print the JSON Schema (Draft 2020-12) describing the whole CLI.
@item describe
Print a capability manifest of the CLI.
@end table

@node Global Flags
@chapter Global Flags

These flags are accepted by every subcommand.

@table @option
@item --json
Alias for @option{--format json}.
@item --format @var{fmt}
One of @code{json}, @code{jsonl}, or @code{explore} (the TUI).
@item --fields @var{a,b,@dots{}}
Restrict output records to the listed fields, reducing token cost for agents.
@item --dry-run
Emit the action plan as JSON and make no changes (write commands).
@item --verbose
Diagnostic output to @code{stderr}.
@item -q, --quiet
Suppress non-error @code{stderr}.
@item --color @var{when}
@code{never}, @code{always}, or @code{auto}. Output is plain text, so this is
accepted for cross-CLI compatibility.
@item --no-color
Disable color.
@item --absolute-time
Render absolute time. Output is always ISO 8601 UTC regardless.
@item -0, --print0
NUL-terminate output for filename-safe piping.
@item --yes, --force
Skip confirmation in non-interactive mode.
@item -h, --help
Print help.
@item -V, --version
Print version and maintainer attribution.
@end table

@node JSON Output and Exit Codes
@chapter JSON Output and Exit Codes

@subheading The response envelope

Every @option{--json} response is a single JSON document:

@example
@{
  "metadata": @{ "tool", "version", "command", "timestamp", @dots{} @},
  "data": @dots{}
@}
@end example

@code{stdout} carries data only; diagnostics and errors go to @code{stderr}.
Timestamps are ISO 8601 UTC with a @code{Z} suffix. With @option{--format
jsonl}, list records are emitted one JSON object per line (no envelope).

@subheading Structured errors

In machine mode a non-zero exit also prints an error object to @code{stderr}.
Its @code{hint} field is a @emph{runnable} command, not prose:

@example
@{"error": @{"code": "NOT_FOUND", "exit_code": 3,
  "message": "no node with id 999",
  "hint": "wiremix node list --json", @dots{}@}@}
@end example

@subheading Exit codes

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@headitem Code @tab Meaning
@item 0 @tab Success
@item 1 @tab General failure
@item 2 @tab Usage error (bad arguments)
@item 3 @tab Resource not found
@item 4 @tab Permission denied
@item 5 @tab Conflict
@end multitable

@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

wiremix reads an optional TOML configuration file, searched for in this order:

@enumerate
@item the path given with @option{-c}/@option{--config};
@item @file{$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/wiremix/wiremix.toml};
@item @file{~/.config/wiremix/wiremix.toml}.
@end enumerate

The file is merged onto the built-in defaults, so it need only specify what you
want to change. Command-line options override the corresponding file settings.

The bundled @file{wiremix.toml} in the source repository is both an example and
the canonical reference for every option and default. It documents:

@table @asis
@item Basic options
@code{remote}, @code{fps}, @code{mouse}, @code{peaks}, @code{char_set},
@code{theme}, @code{tab}, @code{tabs}, @code{max_volume_percent},
@code{enforce_max_volume}, and @code{lazy_capture}.
@item Key bindings
Every action can be bound to keys; both CUA-style and @code{hjkl}/Vim-style
navigation are supported.
@item Themes
Colors and attributes for each UI element. Four themes are built in:
@code{default}, @code{nocolor}, @code{plain}, and @code{steelbore} --- the
Spacecraft Software house theme, which uses the Void Navy / Molten Amber palette
over a Void Navy background. Select one with @code{theme = "steelbore"} or
@option{-t steelbore}.
@item Character sets
The symbols used in the interface: @code{default}, @code{compat}, and
@code{extracompat}.
@item Filters and names
Rules to hide objects, and templates to customize how streams, endpoints, and
devices are named, based on their PipeWire properties.
@end table

@node Reporting Bugs
@chapter Reporting Bugs

wiremix is maintained by Mohamed Hammad
(@email{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}) under the Spacecraft Software
umbrella. See @url{https://Wiremix.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}.

For security-sensitive issues, do not open a public report; email the
maintainer. See the @file{CONTRIBUTING.md} file in the source repository for
contribution guidelines.

@bye
